README.md, before:

# Music Clustering Transformer

A deep learning project designed to cluster music audio using a hierarchical CNN-Transformer architecture. This project processes raw audio files, extracts high-level features through a convolutional backbone, and captures long-term temporal dependencies via a Transformer to generate meaningful music embeddings.

---

## Project Overview

The repository consists of two primary components:
* Thesis_final.ipynb: The core research notebook where the model architecture is defined, trained, and used to generate audio embeddings.
* song_bord.py: A Streamlit-based interactive dashboard that visualizes the resulting embeddings in an interactive space.

---

## Architecture: Clips vs. Segments

The model processes audio in a bottom-up hierarchy to handle long-form audio files efficiently.

### 1. Hierarchical Processing
* The Song: The full, variable-length audio file.
* The Clip (Intermediate): Large 30s blocks used for easier data loading and memory management.
* The Segment (Atomic Unit): Small 3.75s chunks. This is the specific resolution processed by the CNN.

### 2. Constants and Reference Table

| Term | Duration | Samples | Role |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sample Rate | N/A | 8000 Hz | The speed of the audio (low fidelity). |
| Clip | 30.00 sec | 240,000 | The code chops the song into these first for memory handling. |
| Segment | 3.75 sec | 30,000 | Model Input: The CNN processes these independently. |
| Sequence | ~6.25 min | 100 Segments | Transformer Context: The Transformer sees a sequence of 100 segments. |

---

## Data Flow and Tensor Shapes

The data moves through the pipeline following these specific transformations:

1. Input (Dataset):
   The dataset forces every song to be exactly 100 segments long, using padding or cutting as necessary.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size, 100, 1, 30000)

2. Step 1: Flattening (Before CNN):
   The model merges the Batch and Segment dimensions so the CNN processes every segment individually.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size * 100, 1, 30000)

3. Step 2: Feature Extraction (CNN Output):
   The CNN turns the 30,000 raw samples into a dense 1024-dimensional feature vector.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size * 100, 1024)

4. Step 3: Contextualization (Transformer Input):
   The code un-flattens the data. The Transformer now sees a sequence of 100 feature vectors.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size, 100, 1024)

---

## Memory Usage and Constraints

Because N_SEGMENTS is 100, a single item in your batch requires the CNN to run 100 times.
* Calculation: Batch Size 32 * 100 Segments = 3,200 forward passes per training step.
* Risk: High probability of CUDA Out of Memory (OOM) errors on consumer-grade GPUs.
* Fix: If the script crashes, lower N_SEGMENTS (e.g., to 50) or reduce the Batch Size.

---

## Requirements and Installation

Based on the project files, the following dependencies are required:

### Dependencies
* Deep Learning: torch, torchaudio
* Audio Analysis: librosa
* Data Processing: numpy, pandas, scikit-learn
* Visualization: streamlit, plotly, matplotlib
* Utilities: tqdm

### Setup command:
```
pip install torch torchaudio librosa streamlit plotly pandas numpy scikit-learn matplotlib tqdm
```
---

## Data Preparation

Before running the training notebook or the interactive dashboard, ensure your data is structured as follows.

### 1. Audio Files
The scripts expect a directory named `songs` in the root of the project.
* **Path**: `./songs/`
* **Supported Formats**: `.mp3`, `.wav`, `.ogg`
* **Note**: If you are using Google Colab, the notebook is configured to unzip `songs.zip` from your Drive into this local folder.

### 2. Embeddings and Clusters
The `song_board.py` dashboard requires the output generated by the notebook.
* **Embeddings File**: `song_embeddings.json` (Expected in the root directory).
* **Cluster Assignments**: `df_clusters.csv` (Generated at the end of the notebook).

---

## Usage

### 1. Model Training and Embedding Generation
Use the Jupyter Notebook to process your dataset and train the CNN-Transformer model via the command:
```
jupyter notebook Thesis_final.ipynb.
```

### 2. Interactive Song Board
The song_bord.py script uses t-SNE to project the high-dimensional embeddings into an interactive 3D space. It includes features to view metadata and play audio samples directly from the dashboard. Launch it using:
```
streamlit run song_bord.py.
```

Commit message:

Add UU course info, data paths

README.md, after:

# Music Clustering Transformer

This thesis project was developed as part of the final project for the **Applied Data Science** course at **Utrecht University**.

A deep learning project designed to cluster music audio using a hierarchical CNN-Transformer architecture. This project processes raw audio files, extracts high-level features through a convolutional backbone, and captures long-term temporal dependencies via a Transformer to generate meaningful music embeddings.

---

## Project Overview

The repository consists of two primary components:
* Thesis_final.ipynb: The core research notebook where the model architecture is defined, trained, and used to generate audio embeddings.
* song_bord.py: A Streamlit-based interactive dashboard that visualizes the resulting embeddings in an interactive space.

---

## Architecture: Clips vs. Segments

The model processes audio in a bottom-up hierarchy to handle long-form audio files efficiently.

### 1. Hierarchical Processing
* The Song: The full, variable-length audio file.
* The Clip (Intermediate): Large 30s blocks used for easier data loading and memory management.
* The Segment (Atomic Unit): Small 3.75s chunks. This is the specific resolution processed by the CNN.

### 2. Constants and Reference Table

| Term | Duration | Samples | Role |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Sample Rate | N/A | 8000 Hz | The speed of the audio (low fidelity). |
| Clip | 30.00 sec | 240,000 | The code chops the song into these first for memory handling. |
| Segment | 3.75 sec | 30,000 | Model Input: The CNN processes these independently. |
| Sequence | ~6.25 min | 100 Segments | Transformer Context: The Transformer sees a sequence of 100 segments. |

---

## Data Flow and Tensor Shapes

The data moves through the pipeline following these specific transformations:

1. Input (Dataset):
   The dataset forces every song to be exactly 100 segments long, using padding or cutting as necessary.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size, 100, 1, 30000)

2. Step 1: Flattening (Before CNN):
   The model merges the Batch and Segment dimensions so the CNN processes every segment individually.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size * 100, 1, 30000)

3. Step 2: Feature Extraction (CNN Output):
   The CNN turns the 30,000 raw samples into a dense 1024-dimensional feature vector.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size * 100, 1024)

4. Step 3: Contextualization (Transformer Input):
   The code un-flattens the data. The Transformer now sees a sequence of 100 feature vectors.
   - Shape: (Batch_Size, 100, 1024)

---

## Memory Usage and Constraints

Because N_SEGMENTS is 100, a single item in your batch requires the CNN to run 100 times.
* Calculation: Batch Size 32 * 100 Segments = 3,200 forward passes per training step.
* Risk: High probability of CUDA Out of Memory (OOM) errors on consumer-grade GPUs.
* Fix: If the script crashes, lower N_SEGMENTS (e.g., to 50) or reduce the Batch Size.

---

## Requirements and Installation

Based on the project files, the following dependencies are required:

### Dependencies
* Deep Learning: torch, torchaudio
* Audio Analysis: librosa
* Data Processing: numpy, pandas, scikit-learn
* Visualization: streamlit, plotly, matplotlib
* Utilities: tqdm

### Setup command:
```
pip install torch torchaudio librosa streamlit plotly pandas numpy scikit-learn matplotlib tqdm
```
---

## Data Preparation

Before running the training notebook or the interactive dashboard, ensure your data is structured as follows.

### 1. Audio Files
The scripts expect a directory named `songs` in the root of the project.
* **Path**: `./songs/`
* **Supported Formats**: `.mp3`, `.wav`, `.ogg`
* **Note**: If you are using Google Colab, the notebook is configured to unzip `songs.zip` from your Drive into this local folder.

### 2. Embeddings and Clusters
The `song_board.py` dashboard requires the output generated by the notebook.
* **Embeddings File**: `song_embeddings.json` (Expected in the root directory).
* **Cluster Assignments**: `df_clusters.csv` (Generated at the end of the notebook).

---

## Usage

### 1. Model Training and Embedding Generation
Use the Jupyter Notebook to process your dataset and train the CNN-Transformer model via the command:
```
jupyter notebook Thesis_final.ipynb.
```

### 2. Interactive Song Board
The song_bord.py script uses t-SNE to project the high-dimensional embeddings into an interactive 3D space. It includes features to view metadata and play audio samples directly from the dashboard. Launch it using:
```
streamlit run song_bord.py.
```
